@c -*-texinfo-*-

@node net
@section Network protocols

@menu
* net irc::            Internet Relay Chat
* net irc fish::       Blowcrypt/FiSH encryption for IRC
* net otr::            Off-the-Record Messaging
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node net irc
@subsection Internet Relay Chat
The @code{(weinholt net irc)} library provides low-level procedures
for parsing and formatting IRC protocol commands. It makes it easy to
split incoming commands into parts and to format outgoing commands.
There are also helpers for various other parsing needs.

The IRC protocol is standardized by RFCs 2810-2813, but servers very
often (always?) disregard the RFCs. They do provide good guidelines
for what should work.

@deffn Procedure parse-message message [remote-server]
This procedure splits an IRC @var{message} into three parts: prefix,
command and a list of arguments. The command is either a symbol or a
number. If the message does not have a prefix the @var{remote-server}
argument will be used instead, because it is implied by the protocol.

@example
(import (weinholt net irc))
(parse-message 
 ":irc.example.net PONG irc.example.net :irc.example.net")
@result{} "irc.example.net"
@result{} PONG
@result{} ("irc.example.net" "irc.example.net")
@end example

@example
(parse-message 
 ":user!ident@@example.com PRIVMSG #test :this is a test")
@result{} "user!ident@@example.com"
@result{} PRIVMSG
@result{} ("#test" "this is a test")
@end example

@example
(parse-message "PING irc.example.net" "irc.example.net")
@result{} "irc.example.net"
@result{} PING
@result{} ("irc.example.net")
@end example

@example
(parse-message "PING irc.example.net")
@result{} #f
@result{} PING
@result{} ("irc.example.net")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure parse-message-bytevector bv [start end remote-server]
This procedure does the same thing @code{parse-message} does, except
it works on bytevectors. This is useful because the IRC protocol does
not have a standard character encoding. Different channels on IRC
often use different encodings.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure format-message-raw port codec prefix cmd parameters ...
Formats and outputs an IRC message to the given @var{port}, which must
be in binary mode.

The @var{codec} is a codec, meaning the value returned by e.g.@:
@code{utf-8-codec} or @code{latin-1-codec}. The codec is used to
transcode the parameters.

The @var{prefix} is the name of the server or client that originated
the message. IRC clients should use #f as prefix when sending to a
server.

The @var{cmd} is a symbol or string representing an IRC command, but
it can also be an integer (which must be be between 000 and 999). Only
servers send numerical commands.

The rest of the arguments are the @var{parameters} for the given
command, which can be either numbers, strings or bytevectors. Only the
last of the parameters may contain whitespace. The maximum number of
parameters allowed by the protocol is 15. Each IRC protocol command
takes a pre-defined number of parameters, so e.g.@: if @var{cmd} is
@code{PRIVMSG} then you must only pass two parameters.

@example
(import (weinholt net irc))
(utf8->string
 (call-with-bytevector-output-port
   (lambda (port)
     (format-message-raw port (utf-8-codec)
                         "irc.example.net" 1 "luser"
                         "Welcome to the IRC"))))
@result{} ":irc.example.net 001 luser :Welcome to the IRC\r\n"
@end example

@example
(utf8->string
 (call-with-bytevector-output-port
   (lambda (port)
     (format-message-raw port (utf-8-codec)
                         #f 'NOTICE "#example"
                         "Greetings!"))))
@result{} "NOTICE #example Greetings!\r\n"
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure format-message-and-verify port codec prefix cmd parameters ...
This procedure works just like format-message-raw, except before
writing the message it parses the formatted message and compares it
with the input to make sure it is the same. This prevents some attacks
against IRC bots.

@example
(import (weinholt net irc))
(utf8->string
 (call-with-bytevector-output-port
   (lambda (port)
     (format-message-and-verify
      port (utf-8-codec) #f 'NOTICE 
      "#scheme" "announcing the 2^32th irc library!"))))
@result{} "NOTICE #scheme :announcing the 2^32th irc library!\r\n"
@end example

This example shows what happens when a parameter contains a newline,
which is a common attack against bots. The command after the newline
would be sent to the server, and the bot would exit all channels.
Instead an exception is raised:

@example
(utf8->string
 (call-with-bytevector-output-port
   (lambda (port)
     (format-message-and-verify
      port (utf-8-codec) #f 'NOTICE 
      "#example" "Querent: the answer is \r\nJOIN 0"))))
@error{} &irc-format
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure format-message-with-whitewash port codec prefix cmd parameters ...
This provides an alternative to @code{format-message-and-verify} which
is useful if you're not concerned about data integrity, so to speak.
It replaces all bad characters with space before transmitting.

@example
(utf8->string
 (call-with-bytevector-output-port
   (lambda (port)
     (format-message-with-whitewash
      port (utf-8-codec) #f 'NOTICE 
      "#example" "Querent: the answer is \r\nJOIN 0"))))
@result{} "NOTICE #example :Querent: the answer is   JOIN 0\r\n"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure irc-parse-condition? obj
Returns @code{#t} is @var{obj} is an @code{&irc-parse} condition. The
message parsing procedures use this condition when they detect a
malformed message.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure irc-format-condition? obj
Returns @code{#t} is @var{obj} is an @code{&irc-format} condition. The
message formatting procedures use this condition when they are unable
to format a message.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure extended-prefix? str
The prefix in an IRC message can either be a server name or an
extended prefix which identifies a client. Extended prefixes look like
@code{nickname!user@@host}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure prefix-split str
Splits an extended prefix into its parts and returns three values:
nickname, user and host.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure prefix-nick str
Returns the nickname part of an extended prefix.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure parse-isupport list
Parses an @code{ISUPPORT} list. The return value is an alist.

See @url{http://www.irc.org/tech_docs/005.html} for more on
@code{ISUPPORT}.
@c TODO: document how the different parameters are parsed
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure isupport-defaults
Returns an alist of default @code{ISUPPORT} values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-irc=? str1 str2 [mapping]
Compares @var{str1} and @var{str2} for equality. The comparison is
case-insensitive and uses the specified @var{mapping} to compare
characters. This procedure is useful for comparing nicknames.

The @var{mapping} should be one of @code{rfc1459}, @code{ascii} or
@code{strict-rfc1459}. Servers indicate in the @code{CASEMAPPING
ISUPPORT} parameter which mapping they use.

The first IRC servers used Swedish ASCII for nicknames, so the
nicknames @code{sm|rg@}s} and @code{SM\RG]S} are equivalent on some servers.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure string-upcase-irc str mapping
Upcases @var{str} using the given case @var{mapping}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure string-downcase-irc str mapping
Downcases @var{str} using the given case @var{mapping}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure ctcp-message? str
Returns @code{#t} if the @var{str} represents a CTCP message. This is
currently the extent of this library's CTCP support. CTCP is used for
sending files, opening direct connections between clients, checking
client versions, asking for the time, pinging clients, doing
``action'' style messages, and some other stuff.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure irc-match? pattern input
Returns @code{#t} if the @var{pattern}, which can contain wildcards,
matches the @var{input}. Otherwise returns @code{#f}. Strings
containing wildcards are called @dfn{masks}, and they are used in
e.g.@: channel ban lists.

The pattern follows the syntax specified in section 2.5 of RFC2812. A
@code{#\*} matches zero or more characters and @code{#\?} matches any
single character. The comparison is case-insensitive. Wildcard
characters can be escaped with @code{#\\}.

@example
(import (weinholt net irc))
(irc-match? "a?c" "abc")
@result{} #t
(irc-match? "a*c" "ac")
@result{} #t
(irc-match? "a*c" "acb")
@result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@item
@code{(2 0)} -- Replaced @code{swe-ascii-string-ci=?} with
@code{string-irc=?}, which uses the @code{CASEMAPPING ISUPPORT}
parameter. Added @code{string-upcase-irc}, @code{string-downcase-irc},
@code{parse-isupport}, @code{isupport-defaults} and @code{ctcp-message?}.
@item
@code{(2 1)} -- Added @code{irc-match?}.
@end itemize


@c ======================================================================
@node net irc fish
@subsection Blowcrypt/FiSH encryption for IRC
The @code{(weinholt net irc fish)} library provides procedures for
interacting with IRC clients that use Blowcrypt/FiSH encryption.
Messages are encrypted with Blowfish in ECB mode and then encoded with
a peculiar base64 encoding. Keys can be exchanged with Diffie-Hellman
(vulnerable to middleman attacks) or they can be pre-shared. FiSH is
useful if you want to draw attention to your communications.

There is currently no way to initialize key-exchange.

Blowcrypt/FiSH supports both private messages and public channels. If
you only need private messages then OTR provides a much better
protocol. @xref{net otr}.

@deffn Procedure fish-message? str
Returns @code{#f} is the string is not a FiSH message.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure fish-decrypt-message msg key
Decrypts a FiSH message. The @var{msg} is the line that the remote
client sent to you.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure fish-encrypt-message msg key
Encrypts the string @var{msg} with FiSH encryption. Returns a string
containing the plaintext. There is no verification that the key was
correct and the returned string might be garbage.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure fish-key-init? str
Returns @code{#f} is @var{str} is not a FiSH key-exchange
initialization request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure fish-generate-key init-msg
Finishes the DH1080 key-exchange request contained in @var{init-msg}.
Returns two values: the newly generated key and a response for the
remote client. There is no protection against middleman attacks.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-fish-key str
The @var{str} is expanded and can then be used with
@code{fish-decrypt-message} and @code{fish-encrypt-message}.
@end deffn

@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@end itemize


@c ======================================================================
@node net otr
@subsection Off-the-Record Messaging
The @code{(weinholt net otr)} library provides Off-the-Record
Messaging (OTR), which is a security protocol for private chat. It can
be tunneled over any protocol that guarantees in-order delivery
(e.g.@: IRC or XMPP). It provides encryption, authentication,
deniability and perfect forward secrecy.

This library does not manage user identities, which is something the
OTR Development Team's C library does. This choice was made to keep
the implementation simple and focused on the protocol only.

The website for OTR is @url{http://www.cypherpunks.ca/otr/}.

@deffn Procedure otr-message? str
Returns @code{#t} if @var{str}, which is a message from a remote
party, contains an OTR message. If it is an OTR message you should
look up the OTR state that corresponds to the remote party (possibly
make a new state) and call @code{otr-update!}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-otr-state dsa-key mss
Creates an OTR state value given the private DSA key @var{dsa-key} and
a maximum segment size @var{mss}. The state is used to keep track of
session keys and incoming message fragments.

The @var{dsa-key} must have a 160-bit q-parameter because of details
in the protocol and limitations of other implementations. A 1024-bit
DSA key will work. @xref{crypto dsa}.

The maximum segment size @var{mss} is used to split long OTR messages
into smaller parts when OTR is used over a protocol with a maximum
message size, e.g.@: IRC.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-update! state str
Processes the @var{str} message, which came from the remote party,
and updates the @var{state}. Use @code{otr-empty-queue!} to retrieve
scheduled events.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-send-encrypted! state msg
@c tlv ...
This is used to send a message to the remote party. It encrypts and
enqueues the @var{msg} bytevector and updates the @var{state}.
Use @code{otr-empty-queue!} to retrieve the encrypted and formatted
messages that should be sent to the remote party.

The @var{msg} must not contain a NUL (0) byte.
@c TODO: document the tlv parameters when there's a procedure for
@c formatting them, and a way to receive tlv's from the remote party.
@c Optionally you can send one or more @dfn{type/length/value} (TLV)
@c bytevectors. A @var{tlv} can be used to transmit data that is not
@c meant to be shown to the remote party as plain text. The OTR protocol
@c allocates type 0 for padding, and this procedure automatically pads
@c messages with up to 7 bytes, to disguise message lengths. Types 1-7
@c are used by the SMP authentication protocol. Type 1 is used to tell
@c the remote party that your side is closing down the OTR connection.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-authenticate! state secret [question]
Initiate or respond to an authentication request.
After calling this procedure you should use @code{otr-empty-queue!},
just like with @code{otr-send-encrypted!}.

The authentication protocol can be used to verify that both partyies
know the @var{secret} bytevector. The secret is never revealed over
the network and is not even transmitted in an encrypted form. The
protocol used is the Socialist Millionaires' Protocol (SMP), which is
based on a series of zero-knowledge proofs.
@cindex Socialist Millionaires' Protocol
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-empty-queue! state
Returns and clears the event queue. The queue is a list of pairs where
the symbol in the @code{car} of the pair determines its meaning. These
are the possible types:

@itemize
@item
@t{(outgoing . }@emph{line}@t{)} -- The @code{cdr} is a bytevector
that should be sent to the remote party.
@item
@t{(encrypted . }@emph{msg}@t{)} -- The @code{cdr} is a bytevector
that contains a decrypted message that was sent by the remote party.
@item
@t{(unencrypted . }@emph{msg}@t{)} -- The @code{cdr} is a string
that sent @emph{unencrypted} by the remote party. This happens when
a whitespace-tagged message is received. 
@item
@t{(session-established . }@emph{whence}@t{)} -- A session has been
established with the remote party. It is now safe to call
@code{otr-state-their-dsa-key}, @code{otr-state-secure-session-id},
@code{otr-send-encrypted!} and @code{otr-authenticate!}. The
@code{cdr} is the symbol @code{from-there} if the session was
initiated by the remote party. Otherwise it is @code{from-here}.
@item
@t{(session-finished . }@emph{whom}@t{)} -- The session is now
finished and no new messages can be sent over it. The @code{cdr} is
either the symbol @code{by-them} or @code{by-us}. @emph{Note}: there
is currently no way to finish the session from the local side, so
@code{by-us} is not used yet.
@item
@t{(authentication . expecting-secret)} -- The remote party has
started the authentication protocol and now expects you to
call @code{otr-authenticate!}.
@item
@t{(authentication . #t)} -- The authentication protocol has
succeeded and both parties had the same secret.
@item
@t{(authentication . #f)} -- The authentication protocol has
failed. The secrets were not identical.
@item
@t{(authentication . aborted-by-them)} -- The remote party
has aborted the authentication protocol.
@item
@t{(authentication . aborted-by-us)} -- The local party has
encountered an error and therefore aborted the authentication
protocol.
@item
@t{(they-revealed . }@emph{k}@t{)} -- The remote party revealed an old
signing key. This is a normal part of the protocol and the key is sent
unencrypted to ensure the deniability property. You might like to
reveal the key somehow yourself in case you're tunneling OTR over an
encrypted protocol.
@item
@t{(we-revealed . }@emph{k}@t{)} -- The local party has revealed an
old signing key. @emph{Note}: currently not used.
@item
@t{(undecipherable-message . #f)} -- An encrypted message was
received, but it was not possible to decrypt it. This might mean
e.g.@: that the remote and local parties have different sessions or
that a message was sent out of order.
@item
@t{(remote-error . }@emph{msg}@t{)} -- The remote party encountered a
protocol error and sent a plaintext error message (probably in
English).
@item
@t{(local-error . }@emph{con}@t{)} -- The was an exception raised
during processing of a message. The @code{cdr} is the condition value.
@end itemize

For forward-compatibility you should ignore any pair with an unknown
@code{car}. Most messages are quite safe to ignore if you don't want
to handle them.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-state-their-dsa-key state
Returns the remote party's public DSA key. This should be used to
verify the remote party's identity. If the SMP authentication protocol
succeeds you can remember the hash of the key for the next session.
The user could also verify the key's hash by cell phone telephone or
something.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-state-our-dsa-key state
Returns the local party's private DSA key. This is useful when the
user is on the phone with the remote party. First convert it to a
public key with @code{dsa-private->public} and then hash it with
@code{otr-hash-public-key}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-hash-public-key public-dsa-key
Hashes a public DSA key and formats it so that it can be shown to the
OTR user.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-state-secure-session-id state
Returns the @dfn{secure session ID} associated with the OTR state.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure otr-format-session-id id
Formats a secure session ID in the format that is recommended when
the ID should be shown to the OTR user.

The first part of the ID should be shown in bold if the session was
initiated by the local party. Otherwise the second part should be bold.
@end deffn

Isn't this the most boring manual you've ever read?

@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(0 0)} -- Initial version. Lacks a few sanity checks which might
make it unsafe.
@end itemize
