@c -*-texinfo-*-

@node text
@section Textual structure utilities

@menu
* text base64::        Base64 encoding and decoding
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node text base64
@subsection Base64 encoding and decoding
The @code{(weinholt text base64)} library provides procedures for
dealing with the standard Base64 encoding from RFC 4648 and some
variations thereof. The Base64 encoding can be used to represent
arbitrary bytevectors purely in printable ASCII.

One variation of Base64 is in the alphabet used. The standard encoding
uses an alphabet that ends with @code{#\+} and @code{#\/}, but these
characters are reserved in some applications. One such application is
HTTP URLs, so there is a special encoding called base64url that simply
uses a different alphabet.

The line length can also vary. Some applications will need Base64
encoded strings that have no line endings at all, while other
applications have 64 or 76 characters per line. For these uses the
line length must be a multiple of four characters. Sometimes there is
not enough input to get a multiple of four, but then the padding
character @code{#\=} is used. Some applications don't use padding.

Some applications have their own ``Base64'' encodings that encode bits
in a different order. Such will be deemed magic and shall not work
with this library.

@deffn Procedure base64-encode bv [start end line-length no-padding alphabet port]
Encodes the bytevector @var{bv} in Base64 encoding. Optionally a range
of bytes can be specified with @var{start} and @var{end}.

If a maximum line length is required, set @var{line-length} to an
integer multiple of four (the default is @code{#f}). To omit padding
at the end of the data, set @var{no-padding} or a non-false value. The
@var{alphabet} is a string of length 64 (by default
@code{base64-alphabet}).

The @var{port} is either a textual output port or @code{#f}, in which
case this procedure returns a string.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure base64-decode str [alphabet port]
Decodes the Base64 data in @var{str}. The string has to contain pure
Base64 data, including padding, and no whitespace or other extra
characters. The output is written to the binary output @var{port}.
Returns a bytevector if @var{port} is @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure put-delimited-base64 port type bv [line-length]
Write the Base64 encoding of @var{bv} to the @var{port}. The output is
delimited by BEGIN/END lines that include the @var{type}.
@cindex ASCII Armor

@example
(import (weinholt text base64))
(put-delimited-base64 (current-output-port) "EXAMPLE"
                      (string->utf8 "POKEY THE PENGUIN"))
@print{} -----BEGIN EXAMPLE-----
@print{} UE9LRVkgVEhFIFBFTkdVSU4=
@print{} -----END EXAMPLE-----
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure get-delimited-base64 port
Reads a delimited Base64 encoded bytevector and returns two values:
@var{type} (a string) and @var{data} (a bytevector). The @var{data}
value is the end-of-file object if @code{port-eof?} would return
@code{#t}.

@emph{Note}: This procedure ignores MIME headers. Some delimited
Base64 formats have headers on the line after BEGIN, followed by an
empty line.

@emph{Note}: This procedure ignores the Radix-64 checksum. The
Radix-64 format (RFC 4880) is based on Base64, but appends a CRC-24
(prefixed by @code{#\=}) at the end of the data.

The rationale for ignoring headers and checksums is that it follows
the Principle of Robustness: ``Be conservative in what you send; be
liberal in what you accept from others.'' Lines before the BEGIN line
are also ignored, because some applications (like OpenSSL) like to
prepend a human readable version of the data.

You should probably use special parsers if you are reading data with
headers or checksums. For some applications, e.g.@: MIME, you might
need a Base64 decoder that also ignores characters outside the
alphabet.

@example
(get-delimited-base64
 (open-string-input-port
  "-----BEGIN EXAMPLE-----\n\
AAECAwQFBg==\n\
-----END EXAMPLE-----\n"))
@result{} "EXAMPLE"
@result{} #vu8(0 1 2 3 4 5 6)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Constant base64-alphabet
The alphabet used by the standard Base64 encoding. The alphabet is
@code{#\A}--@code{#\Z}, @code{#\a}--@code{#\z},
@code{#\0}--@code{#\9}, @code{#\+}, @code{#\/}.
@end deffn

@deffn Constant base64url-alphabet
The alphabet used by the base64url encoding. The alphabet is
@code{#\A}--@code{#\Z}, @code{#\a}--@code{#\z},
@code{#\0}--@code{#\9}, @code{#\-}, @code{#\_}.
@end deffn

@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@end itemize
